From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is [music] the Daily.
In its escalating campaign against
Venezuela, [music]
the Trump administration has gone from
shooting down drug boats to now [music]
trying to seize multiple oil tankers in
the Caribbean Sea.
Today, [music] my colleague Anatoli
Kmanay explains why President Trump is
shifting his tactics [music]
on Venezuela and what that might tell us
about his true [music] endgame.
[music]
It's Wednesday, December 24th.
Anatoli, merry Christmas. Thanks for
joining us today.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> So, the last time we talked to you was
when the US military was ramping up
these strikes on boats in Latin America
that they claimed were running drugs to
the US. We are coming back to you now
because over the past few weeks we've
been hearing about this new kind of
escalation in the Caribbean which is the
US seizing ships that have been carrying
Venezuelan oil. So help us understand
how you're interpreting this new element
to this operation which has been
dramatic in its own right.
>> We have seen major shifts in the
narrative over the last few weeks.
Natalie, the focus has shifted from a
primarily military campaign to primarily
economic campaign. The US government has
moved away from boat strikes in the
Caribbean and the alleged campaign to
stop the flow of drugs coming from
Venezuela to the United States and they
have moved towards Venezuelan oil. M
>> they have moved towards taking action
against tankers exporting Venezuelan oil
the the biggest source of the country's
revenue with a very clear attempt to to
squeeze the country's finances uh
squeeze them to the point of
strangulation and achieve the results
that they have not been able to achieve
through military ends
>> and what is the goal
>> well the rationale that the US officials
have used for this campaign has varied
throughout last several months but
increasingly the message coming out from
US officials in public is about regime
change, right? That all these different
measures that US has taken against
Venezuela is to force President Niclas
Maduro to to leave office. And Trump has
attempted to crash Venezuelan economy in
the past with a view of getting rid of
Maduro. But what we've seen right now is
unprecedented. It's the biggest economic
pressure against a Latin American state
that we've seen in in decades. Okay,
let's walk through exactly what we've
seen. How exactly did this new and as
you said unprecedented phase of this
pressure campaign start?
>> So on December 10th, an oil tanker
called Skipper carrying about 2 million
barrels of oil was heading east towards
China carrying Venezuelan oil to its
biggest market. Extraordinary video
released by the Trump administration
showing the seizure of an oil tanker off
of Venezuela.
>> Then it was ambushed international
waters by US law enforcement agents.
>> Watch as US Navy helicopters swarm the
tanker
>> who repelled from a helicopter
>> coming onto the um deck of the oil
tanker and then as I see it there, guns
drawn and took control of a vessel.
Tonight, new satellite images of that
oil tanker seized by the US off the
coast of Venezuela, headed to a port in
Galveastston, Texas,
>> and ordered the crew to take the ship
towards Texas.
>> It's a new escalation in President
Trump's pressure campaign against
Venezuela [music] and what he calls its
illegitimate narotist regime. And at
first, [music] the tankers detention
appeared to be a one-off, you know, like
a big public relations move, you know,
aimed to grab world attention, shift the
narrative away from [snorts] attacks on
drug boats, which were becoming
increasingly problematic in US public
opinion, and would draw an increasing
backlash from American lawmakers,
including even some Republicans. [music]
And the seizure was theatrical move that
for many of us with cover Venezuela
thought was a red herring.
>> But it obviously wasn't a red herring.
It wasn't a one-off. The administration
then started going after more tankers.
>> It became part of something bigger.
>> This morning, the United States is
escalating its pressure campaign against
Venezuela.
>> Since then, we have seen the US take
action against two more oil tankers with
ties to Venezuelan oil. The US Coast
Guard is pursuing a third tanker [music]
off the Venezuelan coast. It's the third
in the last 10 days.
>> And they, as [music] we speak, they are
chasing another vessel that has worked
in Venezuela, which was on the way to a
country to pick up crude there.
>> They're actively chasing it [music] in
the ocean.
>> Yeah, it's a very tough image to
understand in your head because clearly
a tanker cannot outrun American
gunboats, but Trump has promised that
[music] they will get it eventually.
Got it. So, two seized tankers, one
that's fled. How is the Venezuelan
government responding to all this? At
this point,
>> Venezuelan government is livid. One
source said Maduro is not just angry,
he's bananas. They have called the US
murderers, thieves, pirates, referring
to, you know, United States as the
pirates of the Caribbean. Anatoli, when
we talked last, you made it very clear
that forcing Maduro out was a big goal
for very powerful people inside the
Trump administration, Marco Rubio, the
Secretary of State in particular. And it
sounds like that goal has become even
more explicit in the weeks since. But
what is Trump saying about the official
justification for what the
administration is doing here?
>> So the initial explanation was that US
is simply enforcing sanctions already in
place. Trump was doing something that
previous administrations didn't have the
gut to do.
>> Can we just pause there and explain for
a moment these pre-existing sanctions
that you're saying have existed on
Venezuela? Take me through those.
>> During his first administration, Trump
made an initial push to topple Maduro
from power and he sanctioned Venezuelan
oil industry. He made it illegal for
American companies to work with
Venezuela State Oil Company, which owns
all the oil in Venezuela. And this made
it very difficult for Venezuela to to
sell its oil. And it started to
increasingly rely on the so-called dark
fleet or shadow fleet. Basically,
tankers exist on the very edge of
legality of international law, but carry
sanctioned oil around the world,
primarily to China. and Venezuela's
reliance on sanctioned vessels uh has
given the current Trump administration a
perfect excuse to go after its oil
industry.
>> And you said that the Trump
administration is now going out and
actually enforcing these sanctions in a
way that it wasn't willing to do before
and in a way that the Biden
administration hasn't done before. Why?
>> Well, the big fear has always been
upsetting the fragile global oil market,
right? creating uh volatility in the
industry and raising global oil prices
which would have an impact on American
pumps. You know, inflation being
obviously a massive political issue in
United States and that has prevented
>> Trump and the B administration in part
from enforcing the sanctions. But this
month, Trump decided to give it a shot.
He threw to the side the caution of the
past and went big time against
Venezuelan's oil industry. And so far
the effects on the oil prices has been
fairly muted. There are a lot of other
different factors at play. The economy
is weak. There's a lot of other
sanctioned oil out there. But so far the
prices have not bulged in any meaningful
way which has given him a card blanch to
to expand his strategy to to scale it
up. But there's a bigger justification
in play. You know, shortly after the
detention with First Tanker, Trump
published this long screed on Truth
Social, his his media platform, where he
alleged a wholesale theft of American
oil by Venezuelan government. Venezuelan
government, according to him, has stolen
American land, has stolen American oil,
has defrauded American oil companies,
and he is writing a historical wrong.
>> What is he actually talking about there?
Explain that. The short answer is that
we don't know is a is a very incoherent
tax that does not neatly match on any
historical events. But throughout its
history, Venezuela had several ways of
nationalization. Most recently in 2007
where Maduro's predecessor Ugo Chavez
nationalized some of the oil fields
leading to the exodus of some American
companies like Axen Mobile and Kanoko
Phillips who have been suing Venezuelan
government ever since. Okay, so we're
not exactly sure what Trump was
referring to, but it seems to be a
reference to this period of
nationalization where American oil
companies were kicked out of Venezuela
and the government took control.
>> That's right. And Trump announced,
and I quote him, a total and complete
blockade of all sanctioned oil tankers
going into and out of Venezuela. A few
days later, his advisor Steven Miller
followed up with with even arguably even
more incendurary tweets alleging that
Venezuela oil industry has been created
by the toil and ingenuity of of American
people and America wants its rights
back.
>> But there is an exception to all this,
right, Anatoli? Chevron, which is an
American oil company, is still operating
in Venezuela.
>> That's right, Natalie. The reality is a
lot more complex.
than the narrative that the Trump
administration is attempting to put
forward. During that last wave of
nationalization, not all American
companies have left. Some have stayed
and the biggest one being Chevron. It's
negotiated with the Solan governments
and the deal that they have worked out
both with Nicholas Maduro and the
government of the United States allows
them to produce all the oil from the
fields that it operates in Venezuela and
give back half of that oil to Venezuelan
government and export the rest to the
United States.
>> Mhm. The thinking of a company has been
that they're willing to swallow this
temporary period of losses or reduced
profits for [snorts] the eventual bounty
that awaits the company in the event of
a government change in Venezuela.
Venezuela is sitting on top of the
world's largest oil reserves and Chevron
would be in a position to benefit from
that.
It is interesting that piece of this
that on the one hand US policy has been
to put maximum pressure on the Maduro
regime and yet on the other they are
kind of propping up the regime by
allowing Chevron to give its oil back to
the government.
>> Well, it goes to be hard to be
inconsistency of American policy towards
Minnesota right now.
There's a clear intention to starve
Maduro of funds to to force them to
negotiate at [music] best and leave
power at wars. On the other hand, US is
very preoccupied [music]
with Venezuela's energy asset fall into
Chinese hands in [music] case of chaos
in the country.
Right? So it has chosen to keep [music]
Chevron working there, continue earning
revenues, continue propping up
Venezuelan governments because [music]
it is concerned that if Chevron were to
leave, those oil fields would fall into
Chinese hands. And the clear
contradictions of this policy makes it
[music] very difficult for anyone to
understand what will happen in Venezuela
next.
[music]
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Anatoli, before the break, you left us
with a sense that it is really hard to
know how all of this is going to play
out, but it seems clear from what you
said that the point of this campaign is
to create pain inside of Venezuela. So,
I want to turn to that. I want to talk
about the impact this is having inside
the country. How are Venezuelans feeling
about it and how is the Maduro regime
responding?
>> Since the start of seizures of tankers,
Venezuelan oil experts have plummeted.
This is by far the biggest source of
revenue for the country. And we don't
know what political effect this is going
to have, but we know that this is going
to have a very negative effect on
Venezuelan economy and by extension on
Venezuelan people. Most people in
Minnesota and Natalie dislike Maduro.
They want him gone. More than 70% of
them voted against him in last year's
election and they would love to see
political change in the country. And
this current shock and awe strategy
employed by Trump, many support it. They
are prepared to put up with some
economic pain if it means Maduro live in
office in any meaningful amount of time.
The worry, the anxiety in Venezuela
right now is that if Maduro withstands
this current blow, if he manages to
adapt, then the fear is that Venezuelans
will be stuck living in an impoverished,
poor, isolated economy.
>> It could leave them worse off. Actually,
>> it could leave them worse off. And
remember, Natalie, that this country has
just been beginning to emerge from
another extremely deep economic crisis
which was caused by Maduro's terrible
economic policies and corruption, but
was aggravated by American sanctions.
And life has become a little bit easier
in the last few years. The the
government has liberalized the economy,
took away many of the currency and price
control that have been hubbling economic
activity. People could breathe, people
could work, they could invest a little
bit, they could see the return on their
investment. And this new pressure
campaign by Trump is scrambling all
these plans.
>> And inside of Maduro administration is
disbelief and anxiety. They are still
scrambling to figure out what exactly is
happening, how they can react to it.
Ships are afraid to come to Venezuela.
They turning around. They are unwilling
to take Venezuelan crude. They are
sitting in ports because they afraid of
being seized and the oil has to be
pumped. The oil has to keep coming on
the ground. The soil doesn't have a lot
of storage. It doesn't know what to do
with it. There are calls to seize some
of the tankers and use them as storage
facilities. There are calls to maybe put
armed soldiers on top of the tankers and
left them accompany all the way to
China. Venezuela's gunboats have already
been escorting tankers inside Venezuelan
waters. they are calls to maybe expand
them and let these gunboats go into
international waters. Of course,
increasing the risk of confrontation
with US military. It's a period of
extreme tension and extreme fear inside
Venezuelan government right now. And is
the Trump administration's logic here
that essentially by imposing what the
president has called a blockade, by
creating such terrible conditions inside
Venezuela, the US either prompts an
uprising by the Venezuelan people or
Maduro just voluntarily leaves and gives
up power. Is that what they're after?
>> That is the calculation. In the last few
weeks, we have seen Trump officials
becoming increasingly explicit about
their aims. Susie Biles, the White House
chief of staff, said that the US is
going to keep blowing up boats until
Maduro cries uncle. Christine Owen, the
Homeland Security Secretary said on Fox
News that Maduro needs to be gone. The
calculation is that the economic
pressure, economic pain is going to make
Maduro's holding power untenable. That
is going to lead to an internal
uprising, an internal coup by factions
of the military that will ask him to
leave or eliminate him.
>> And what's your sense of whether that
will actually work? Because you, I know,
are a student of Latin American history.
The US has been squeezing Maduro
economically for years now. And Cuba,
for example, has been under a US embargo
for more than a half century. The
communist government is still holding on
to power.
>> That's right. There are few historical
precedents for when economic pressure
leads to regime change. Governments
adapt and when economy shrinks, people
become more dependent on the government,
not less.
>> Government is holding a bigger share of
a shrinking pie. You know, I grew up in
Russia. There's an also anecdote. You
know, a a school girl is is walking home
and stumbles upon her drunken father and
she says to him, "Daddy, I heard that
vodka is getting more expensive. Does
that mean that you're going to be
drinking less?" And he goes, "No,
sweetie. It means you're going to be
eating less."
>> Wow.
>> And and I think this analogy applies
well to Venezuela.
>> Wow. The Soviets really do have the best
anecdotes. I'm also struck anati by the
obvious thing that happens when you
squeeze a country economically which is
that people who are suffering try to
leave it they migrate which is another
thing the Trump administration really
doesn't want to see happen right
>> absolutely and and again we're coming
back to the contradictions of this
policy that we have talked about earlier
the Trump administration's overarching
goal is to stop the flow of migrants to
the United States at the same time it is
dramatically worsening economic
conditions in Venezuela, which if it
continues is going to lead to another
increase in migration from the country
is going to put pressure on Venezuela's
neighbors and it's going to lead some of
people to head north towards the United
States. And this is a point that the
Maduro government has been making very
clear that the campaign to topple it
from power is only going to create an
economic crisis and political
instability that's going to lead to a
new migration crisis in the country.
When we talked about the boat strikes a
while ago, Anatoli, you had mentioned
that there was this faction inside of
the administration that was pushing for
a diplomatic route, for a negotiation
that might give the US a deal and a way
out of this escalation, this campaign.
Is that still an option here with now
the seizures of these oil tankers?
>> That is a crucial question. That is what
I'm focused on because the the headlines
are dramatic. The headlines
unprecedented. But underneath these
dramatic events actually appears to be a
potential diplomatic solution.
Trump is saying that Maduro has stolen
American oil, that he has defrauded
American companies, that America wants
its oil back. And of course, Maduro has
already offered Trump Venezuelan oil
during an earlier round of negotiations
that took place in the spring of this
year. The two governments have come
pretty close to an agreement that would
see a massive increase of American oil
investment in the country and the
country opening up and basically
redirecting its flow of oil from China
to the United States and opening up to
American companies, American
investments. And what benefit would that
actually give the United States? Can you
just walk us through what the US
actually gets out of potentially
controlling Venezuelan oil reserves?
>> It would give United States control over
the world's largest known oil reserves,
which in turn means that the US can
control the supply of oil, can control
the global oil prices, and can reward
its allies and punish its adversaries by
manipulating the oil market. Okay. So,
geopolitical benefit.
>> Absolutely. Geopolitical benefit. And
there's a bigger, more fundamental
benefit for the United States. Control
of the world's largest oil reserves
would allow United States to follow
through of its plan of becoming the
dominant player in the Americas of
expelling its adversaries, China,
Russia, and Iran from a region and
dominating the country's political and
economic environment.
>> Yeah. And we've seen the Trump
administration explicitly acknowledge
that that is the goal of its foreign
policy in this recent document that it
put out its national security strategy
to establish itself, the United States
as the predominant power in the Western
Hemisphere. So how are Russia responding
to this? So far standing on the
sidelines of course China has just
sealed a major trade deal with United
States which is [snorts] crucial to its
economy and it's been very careful about
what fights picks with United States. We
have seen the seizure of Chinese
property in the actions taken against
tankers. China has issued a statement
condemning these seizures but has not
taken any further action. Russia as well
has made some gestures of uh verbal
support but has not moved beyond that.
We have not seen Maduro's allies come to
its aid in any meaningful way. We have
basically seen America's adversary
acknowledging Latin America as a sphere
of American influence.
>> Why would they do that? Why aren't they
coming out more forcefully in defense of
Venezuela and against this action by the
US which theoretically would expand
American power? Part of it is a position
of relative weakness. They are
preoccupied elsewhere. Of course, Russia
is fighting a massive war in Ukraine.
China is dealing with economic slowdown.
They have bigger fish to fry. But
Trump's actions also fit into this
country's fundamental worldview which
basically sees world powers, regional
powers having a right to dominate their
neighbors. And for Russia, the loss of
Maduro is an acceptable cause for
American acknowledgement that it has
rights to defend its interest in Eastern
Europe.
>> It's fascinating. It sounds like
basically an acceptance by these two
great powers that yes, carving up the
world into spheres of influence works
well for them, too.
>> Yeah. The so-called multipolar world has
been something that Putin has been
talking about for for years and you know
it was sort of largely ignored by
western media by western policy makers
and Trump's actions uh bringing this
world into reality. Anatoli, given
everything you've told us, do you think
we're more likely or less likely to see
military action on the ground in
Venezuela than we were before the
seizures of the tankers started? Because
I think all of this action against
Venezuela is really concerning for
people who don't want to see a war.
We've now seen dozens of boats blown up,
American aircraft carriers, and other
warships kind of positioned around
Venezuela. We keep hearing that Trump is
open to land strikes. Bottom line, are
we seeing this ratchet up or cool off
militarily?
>> It it is quite ironic talking about
cooling off as tankers are being seized
on high seas and being chased throughout
the Caribbean. And of course, the US
continues to build up its military
presence in the region.
>> But paradoxically, perhaps we are seeing
a a certain ramp down of the
escalations. H
>> we have seen the focus of the boat
strikes move towards the eastern Pacific
away from Venezuela an area where
actually most of the cocaine is being
trafficked and [snorts]
we are seeing on one hand an escalation
of economic pressure of Maduro to see
whether this economic shock is going to
be enough to topple Maduro from power.
On the other hand, however, we are
seeing the emergence of a potential
offramp
of a potential diplomatic deal which
would allow Maduro to ensure the
survival of his political movements in
return for handing the country's natural
wealth to the United States.
[music]
Well, Anatoli, thank you so much.
Pleasure to be here.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, the Supreme Court refused to
allow [music] the Trump administration
to send hundreds of National Guard
troops into the Chicago area. It was a
rare departure from [music] recent cases
where the conservative majority has
sided with Trump in early tests of
presidential power. The order is
preliminary, [music] but it casts doubt
on the viability of similar deployments
in other cities and likely will set
ground rules [music] for legal
challenges in Portland and Los Angeles.
>> [music]
>> And the Trump administration says it
will begin the process of seizing pay
from student loan borrowers who are in
default [music] starting as soon as next
month. Officials will send the first
round of notices to a,000 borrowers
[music] and those notices will increase
every month. It's unclear exactly how
much will be deducted, but the
government can [music] take as much as
15% of an employees wages for loan
repayment.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Michelle Bonja, Shannon Lynn, and Eric
Kupkkey. It was [music] edited by Maria
Burn, and Patricia Willins with help
from Paige Cowit. Contains music by Dan
Powell, Diane Wong, and Marian Lozano,
and was engineered by Alyssa [music]
Moxley.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitro. See you after the holiday.